back when Facebook was The prominent
platform for young adults there was a
number of studies on this showing that
people who are high in narcissistic
personality traits have more friends on
Facebook so what that means is your
average interaction on social media is
more likely to be with a narcissist
algorithms on social media tend to
amplify
things that are divisive things that are
angry because they get more what they
call engagement and that's how the
companies make more money so those tend
to be pushed to the top of the of
people's social media feeds you are
getting a relatively small population
who's dominating this conversation and
kind of ruining for the rest of us well
you know I've thought for a long time
that a lot of the conditions that we
diagnose as psychopathology
aren't malfunctions let's say have
evolutionarily adapted structures but
more like positive feedback loops that
have gone out of control
and so there's there's a lot of
pathological processes that are feedback
loops that have got out of control and
if the narcissists are garnering excess
attention online and the algorithms are
amplifying that then we have the makings
of something like a virtual social
epidemic
[Music]
thank you
hello everyone I'm pleased today to be
talking with a fellow research
psychologist Dr Jean m twangy is the
author of the recent igen why today's
super connected kids are growing up less
rebellious more tolerant less happy and
completely unprepared for adulthood she
is Professor of psychology at San Diego
State University and the author of more
than 180 scientific Publications and
books
her other published books include
generation me why today's Young
Americans are more confident assertive
entitled and more miserable than ever
before
the narcissism epidemic living in the
age of entitlement co-authored with W
Keith Campbell
the impatient woman's guide to getting
pregnant
personality psychology understanding
yourself and others co-authored with W
Keith Campbell and Social Psychology
co-authored with David G Myers Dr twangy
frequently gives talks and seminars on
teaching
and working with today's Young
Generation based on a data set of 11
million young people her audiences have
included College faculty and staff High
School teachers military personnel Camp
directors and corporate Executives her
research has been covered
by time Newsweek the New York Times USA
Today U.S news and World Report and the
Washington Post and she has been
featured on today Good Morning America
CBS This Morning Fox and Friends NBC
Nightly News Dateline NBC and National
Public Radio
Dr twangy holds a ba and M.A from the
University of Chicago and a PhD from the
University of Michigan she lives in San
Diego with her husband and three
daughters I'm very much looking forward
to talking to Dr twangy today
particularly about narcissism and online
Behavior among young people you
introduced the book who is igen and how
do we know and then talk about chapter
one in no hurry growing up slowly that's
the prolongation of childhood and so
tell us about that and also about what
you make of it
yeah so
childhood really does last longer now
kids are not as independent and when
they get to be teenagers they're just
less likely to do all of these things
that adults do and children don't do
and it's part of a bigger cultural story
and it's part of what evolutionary
psychologists call a slow life strategy
so that means at times and places when
people live longer when Healthcare is
better and when education takes longer
to finish parents tend to make the
choice to have fewer children and
nurture them more carefully so that's a
pretty good description of the way that
we raise kids now
so you get that kids don't walk to
school by themselves as much and then
when they're teens they are more
reluctant to get their driver's license
or to go out
um or to date or have a paid job
and then by Young adulthood
takes longer for people to settle into a
career and get married and have children
and then even older adults affects them
too that 50 is the new 40 and people are
healthy for longer so the entire
trajectory of life is really slowed down
and for igen and Generation Z where that
really comes out is that their teen
years are very different from their Gen
X parents who remember you know going
out driving around in cars getting in
trouble drinking alcohol all of those
things and their kids don't do that as
much
so do you do you see this as a
prolongation of childhood in a positive
way because people have longer to live
or because of the the cynic in me I
suppose the Freudian too thinks of this
as an as a consequence of overprotective
parenting and the inappropriate
extension of childhood into adolescence
and I'm wondering too
um to what degree
you talked about improvements in health
care and transformations in technology
longer life span
um
to what degree is this also a
consequence of the fact that people are
older when they have children
that they have fewer children and that
they're wealthier which all of that
would make them in some sense more
conservative but also in some strange
sense more careful with their children
and maybe even more inappropriately
careful and the especially the age of
parents that that's increased over the
years and the fact that there are fewer
siblings which also seems to me to tie
into your work on narcissism because I
think siblings tend to knock the
narcissism out of each other and so when
you don't have any well you you
definitely are a specialist especially
if your parents have been waiting for
you for a long time
yeah so it's definitely a function of
people waiting longer to have kids and
she said they have more resources and
they have fewer children
um because when you think about this
strategy that's when it happens it
happens when there's more security and
when everything tends to slow down and
when there's fewer kids just from an
evolutionary perspective then parents
are going to protect them more it's also
you just can't keep track of them all
when there's a lot of them
um so my my mother comes from a family
like that there were eight children in
her family and a dairy farm in Minnesota
and they couldn't possibly you know have
run their dairy farm and kept track of
every single one of the kids so they
learn how to be independent very early
on but you know that was in the 1940s
and 50s and that was the standard at the
time even even families with fewer kids
it was normal for the children to go and
play and it was be home at dinner or
come home from the street lights come on
if you grew up in a more urban setting
but that was that was the idea of you
know you kind of let kids
do what they wanted to and that's
different now and it's not just from the
parents so I think sometimes if you just
look at other the parents are
overprotective you miss some of the
bigger cultural story that I mean this
has been codified into law in a lot of
places in the state of Illinois you're
not allowed to leave a child alone until
they're 14 years old which to a gen xer
is ridiculous right so do you see this
how do you evaluate this as a
psychologist do you just see this as a a
part of the normal variation in
parenting Behavior as a consequence of
technological transformation or do you
see something
something that's permanently affecting
people's capability of maturing you know
I think it's some of both
um it is part of Technology certainly
that all of these causes are rooted in
technology Better Health Care education
taking longer for a more complex society
and more knowledge that pushes toward
that slow life strategy
um so it's an adaptation it's an
adaptation to a particular place and
time so there's trade-offs neither a
slow life strategy or a fast life
strategy is all good or all bad
there are some clear advantages the kids
are not growing up as fast most parents
are thrilled that not as many teens are
having sex or drinking alcohol
but there is the downside the downside
is that we have a generation growing to
adulthood who doesn't have as much
experience with Independence
and it's difficult often for them to
make decisions on their own so when I
travel around the universities this is
what I hear very consistently I have
more and more students who can't make
even simple decisions without texting
their parents and to take the
perspective of this Young Generation too
which I think is important it makes
sense it's you know this is not
necessarily how they ask to be raised
this is the culture that they grew up in
and they arrive at University with
without those experiences of of making
those decisions and it's really really
hard for them to do that and to make
that adjustment so that's the big
downside so that's where I think you
know as you said you can be more of a
cynic or or a Critic and say you know
this is definitely not all good I do
hesitate to use the word maturity though
because is it more mature or less mature
to drink alcohol when you're 17. it's
really neither one so I think it's
better to focus on
that it's slower development not
necessarily better not necessarily worse
but slower yeah well there were there
were studies of alcohol use I remember
conducted when I was studying alcohol
several decades ago looking at
um let's say life outcomes among
teenagers as a consequence of their
proclivity to break rules
and the findings basically were that and
this is probably what you'd expect is
that the kids who broke no rules were
much more likely to be dependent
depressed and anxious and the kids that
broke too many rules were much more
likely to be anti-social
right and criminal and so there's a
there's a a sweet spot in the middle
like there is so often where a certain
amount of experimentation is exactly
what you'd hope for and the question
would be if the proclivity of young
people to drink less alcohol and I mean
alcohol is pretty damn toxic it's a bad
drug All Things Considered is a nap good
because they're delaying their
experimentation that's probably
neurologically healthy at least with
regards to the effects of alcohol but if
it means that they're doing less
experimentation in general then that the
question is what the long-term
consequences are I mean if it's only a
delayed maturation then in some sense it
doesn't make that much difference but if
it's a permanent abdication of
maturation and that's a completely
different issue and you also mentioned
cell phones and texting parents I mean
one of the ways that people learn to
make decisions before there were cell
phones is that they didn't really have a
choice because if you were away from
your parents in a car you are actually
away unless you could get to a pay phone
let's say but even then that wasn't
necessarily all that likely and you'd
have to go search one out and so you
were on your own it wasn't just but you
were acting like it and now because
you're connected all the time with this
electronic tether especially I would say
if your parents are somewhat anxious
then well under what circumstances
should you make your own decisions and
that was never a choice before and those
sorts of things become problematic when
they become a choice yeah no I I agree I
mean that's that's the other piece that
technology plays and it is yeah you know
even when you're at University you can
constantly contact your parents in a way
that didn't used to be possible
and the other part of it too
and this gets to some of the other
Trends in the book is that socializing
for teens has moved online
and so you think about a lot of those
things on that list that adults do and
children don't where a lot of them
involve getting out of the house and
hanging out with friends and getting in
a car usually to go be with other people
and that doesn't happen as much now
because the party is on Snapchat or on
Instagram so that's the other way that
technology is playing a role is there's
so much more interaction online and less
face to face
while today's cups of coffee often come
with hints of soy and social justice our
new coffee sponsor delivers an entirely
different experience it's bold strong
delicious and overall as good as the
causes it supports I'm speaking of
course about Black Rifle coffee many of
you know about Black Rifle already it's
a veteran founded and operated Coffee
Company who have made it their mission
to hire 10 000 veterans and they're well
on their way
by purchasing for Black Rifle Coffee
Company you're directly supporting the
military service Community but what
about the coffee itself well it's bold
strong and really good
go to blackriflecoffee.com and use promo
code Jordan for 10 off your first order
or when you sign up for a new coffee
Club subscription the subscription gives
you free shipping on all coffee Club
orders Early Access to Club deals and
promotions and special discounts from
their partner brands that's black
riflecoffee.com with promo code Jordan
for 10 off your first order or when you
sign up to become a coffee Club member
Black Rifle coffee supporting veterans
and America's coffee
yeah and so what do you think that
let me run some hypotheses about online
Behavior by Me by you and let me and you
tell me what you think I've read tens of
thousands of comments on YouTube and on
Twitter and so forth and tried to uh
many of which I find almost unbearably
infuriating which is very interesting
reaction I don't think it's Unique to me
and the reaction I have often is
something like
when an anonymous troll posts something
particularly caustic I think if you
dared say anything like that to me to my
face even once there would be so much
trouble surrounding you immediately that
you can hardly imagine it but online you
know there is this social distancing
phenomena that's well known to social
psychologists and personality
psychologists that if you're even if
you're in your car and thereby
uh sheltered let's say from immediate
interpersonal feedback you're much more
likely to act in a self-centered and
self-aggrandizing manner because you
miss that immediate feedback and there's
absolutely no consequence whatsoever to
behaving in a narcissistic and
self-centered manner online as far as I
can tell and
um
then that tends to promote especially
for people who are rather disinhibited
to begin with that promotes a kind of
self-aggrandizing narcissism that is out
would be absolutely Unthinkable in real
life and then you wonder well if that's
happening all the time online how much
of that becomes a habitual mode of
thought and what do you think about
well you know it's classic social
psychology right that when people are
Anonymous they're much more likely to be
aggressive you know physically verbally
and so absolutely that's that's one of
the primary issues or challenges with
online interaction is we're not face to
face we can't see the look on the other
person's face when we say something
caustic or you know highly critical or
insulting
so because we did if you have any
modicum of social skills you wouldn't do
that so it's not a real-time back and
forth and you're not you're not um
seeing those facial expressions and so
you know all that is lost and so it
becomes contentious much more quickly it
becomes negative much more quickly
aggressive you know all of that goes on
it's just kind of the way that the
interaction goes and
is that narcissism per se I'm not sure I
would label it that way exactly it's
it's more that it's Anonymous and thus
it frees people to just go with their
base impulses especially around
aggression well especially you'd think
it would free people who are prone to
have those proclivities to do that as
well and I also think that that's more
true of people who Harbor a fair bit of
resentment and who are relatively
cowardly because if they're resentful
well then they're going to be looking
for the opportunity to to use derision
in particular like I've noticed on
YouTube the markers for pathological
Behavior seem to me to be quite clear
the first marker is an anonymous account
and I think those are appalling the
social media company should have know
your customer laws like Banks do and
they should put the damn Anonymous
trolls into their own pit of Hell you
know and shouldn't be mixed in with the
real people and then often the worst
Anonymous accounts have a demonic
sounding name
and so there's something about the name
that is is derisive or often literally
demonic they pick some moniker that's
appalling in in the most fundamental
metaphoric way and then they tend to use
derisive nicknames and acronyms like
laugh out loud or LMFAO or WTF there's
these this casual use of derision and
contempt you know there's a there's
great study done
I don't remember who did it
unfortunately looking at predictors of
marital break up as a consequence of
interpersonal interaction between the
pairs of a couple and the best predictor
of imminent marital breakup was
eye-rolling so the manifestation of
contempt what's that
John gottman yeah that's right gottman
gortman yeah yeah and so it's that it's
that use of contempt in particular you
know and I also I read Hitler's table
talk
and that's a collection of his
spontaneous speeches at meal Times
aggregated by his secretarial staff over
about four years and I was looking at
descriptive uh term usage trying to
understand his thought processes and
it's pretty damn obvious that Hitler
wasn't afraid of the Jews or the other
people that he conducted genocide
against his fundamental
um emotional attitude towards such
people was derisive contempt and disgust
there's something particularly toxic
about disgust and contempt and there's
something about online commentary in
particular that really brings that
forward and then you have the other
problem I would say too which is that in
some sense ever the online world and
that this is the world that the IGN kids
are immersed in is a it's a faux
celebrity world
right because everyone online in some
sense is a celebrity of different
proportions they have their followers
they have their fans let's say and then
the whole Enterprise seems to
um facilitate image management I know on
I think it's tick tock there are real
time
facial feature adjustment filters so
that you can make this girls use them
more than boys for obvious reasons you
can make your lips plumper you and red
or you can make your eyes bigger you can
anim yourself you can you can cutify
yourself to to kind of a terrible term
and you can do that in real time and
all of the or much of the reinforcement
pressure seems to be directed towards
attention seeking and then that combined
with the fact that there are almost no
consequences for misbehavior seem to
produce a pretty first of all a toxic
social environment but also one that
doesn't follow the same rules as actual
face-to-face contact which I think is
the bigger Danger
and an economy as volatile as this one
it's important to have control when
you're making a big purchase like a new
car that's where cars in comes into play
carzing is completely changing the way
you buy a car online an online car
shopping website with millions of listed
Vehicles carzing works with over 25 000
dealers Nationwide to help you find your
dream car by partnering with Credit
Agencies lenders and dealerships karzing
provides you with everything you need
before stepping foot into a dealership
their mission is to make auto financing
quick and easy while providing a modern
hassle-free way of shopping for cars
their Innovative technology and
financial tools provide consumers with
the ability to instantly pre-qualify
online without affecting your credit
score plus you can search for vehicles
with instant financing details including
down payment monthly payment term and
APR once you find your dream car at your
ideal budget all you have to do is bring
your save deal voucher with you to the
dealership to finalize your next ride
carzing offers transparency to the max
you know you're purchasing options
before you set foot into the dealership
which makes the whole process so much
more convenient visit karzing.com Jordan
today to skip the guesswork and find the
best deals near you that's carzing.com
Jordan
yeah and you know I think the online
world has fallen interesting trajectory
you know when it comes to attention
seeking and narcissism and and so on so
the one constant you're right the trolls
the ones who are the worst offenders
yeah sociopaths narcissists clearly
they've shown that in in research but
for everybody else I think early on
social media was something that pulled
for that attention seeking and you got
that narcissism there of you know look
at me I'm on MySpace and I have this
many followers and here's all of all of
my pictures and so on but then when
social media became more mandatory which
is really what it became for igen around
the early 2000s 2010s I mean
when you know almost 80 percent 85 or so
of high school students were doing that
every single day on social media
then and everybody's participating well
not everybody can get attention
so then it becomes this competition
so it I think at that point became less
about narcissism for most people and
more about not Measuring Up
and that's right and that's where so
that's when you start to get I I have to
use these enhancement filters because I
don't look as good as everybody else
online and I must be you know
unattractive because I don't have as
many likes and followers as I want to
have
um and then all of the other things I'm
not interacting with someone face to
face I'm not getting the same emotional
connection and that people are
automatically more negative and hostile
I mean there's just there's so many
things going on in that online
interaction
um once especially once it became
mandatory that pulled not even really
for narcissism but more for anxiety and
depression right right so maybe that's
part of the reason that you've been
picking up these and and uh indicating
these increases in mental health
symptoms among young people well the
other thing I'm wondering about too I've
thought about this to a great degree is
that
I studied anti-social behavior in boys
and girls and boys they're pretty much
straightforward juvenile delinquents
when they're anti-social they they kick
and and and and fight and and steal and
break rules and it's a lot of
externalizing behavior right a lot of
acting out but girls who are anti-social
they use reputation destruction and
innuendo and gossip and backbiting and
they can be unbelievably good at it and
everyone knows that I mean mean girls
that famous movie was about precisely
that and the thing about social media
that's one of the things about it that's
quite interesting and disturbing is that
female type anti-social Behavior scales
brilliantly on online
because it can be done behind the scenes
it can be done anonymously it can be
done with that there is of contempt
let's say and the consequences are
vanishingly small and so I can imagine
that teenage girls who are often subject
to bullying by other girls are now
subject to bullying in a way that's much
more subtle and much more devious and
much more continuous because that's the
other thing that happens to young people
now is can you imagine being a teenager
where nothing you ever did would be
forgotten
all right right and it's it's 24 7. it's
always with you because that's way the
way they communicate with their friends
that is the lifeline to the world and so
it used to be maybe you got bullied at
school you could come home and get away
from it and now there's no no there's no
Escape
um and it is particularly toxic for
girls I mean think about Instagram
Instagram at base is a platform where
primarily girls and young women post
pictures of themselves and ask other
people to comment Jesus you know brutal
right it absolutely is brutal and
popularity becomes a number likes and
followers uh and cyber bullying all the
things that we're talking about just it
is a toxic suit well I remember you know
we we did uh psychometric analysis and
and looked at the psychometric analysis
of thought patterns that loaded on trait
neuroticism
and so as you know well but I'll explain
to everyone else trait neuroticism is
something like your Baseline level of
the proclivity to experience negative
emotion like depression and anxiety and
one of the things that's quite striking
is that self-conscious thoughts load so
heavily on your autism they're almost
indistinguishable from emotions and so
it looks like if you're self-conscious
if you're thinking about yourself you
are instantly miserable
and then if you're a teenage then it
gets worse for teenage girls I think
because we also know that
teenage girls experience a spike in
neuroticism that's a tenant on puberty
and that their self-conscious concerns
tend to be particularly body focused
and that's probably a consequence of the
fact that females are evaluated more
stringently as a consequence of their
appearance particularly when they're
young I mean men are evaluated on the
basis of their performance let's say but
women tend to be evaluated more on the
basis of their appearance and so you can
see that's a perfect storm for young
girls because they hit a negative
emotion Peak at 13. now they're
susceptible to bullying they're
extremely self-conscious about their
bodies and then the entire online world
is a place to display for public it's
like the old nightmare that people have
about public speaking is being naked on
a stage that's really in some real sense
what the social media world has done to
teenage girls it's it it's it's got to
be damn near unbearable
yeah and that the consequences have have
been severe
um so teen depression
has doubled and that was true even
before the pandemic the rise started uh
about 2011 or 2012 right as social media
moved from optional to mandatory and
right when smartphones were owned by the
majority of people uh loneliness went up
anxiety went up
um and it's not just symptoms
self-harm Behavior so the CDC
keeps track of this emergency room
visits for self-harms that's an
objectively measured Behavior not
something subject to any kind of
self-report bias and self-harm among 10
to 14 year old girls has quadrupled in
the last 12 years yeah yeah yeah well
that's that's a logical extension of
feelings of inadequacy and depression
and anxiety no no a non-specific marker
now you mentioned earlier also and I
thought this was very interesting a
couple of things I wanted to touch on
the first was that you indicated that
there was some research on Anonymous
trolls and their personality
characteristics and then you also said
that the self-aggrandizing element of
the web of web presence was spearheaded
in some sense by the narcissists but
then once it became mandatory it was
more of a catch-up game for people who
were experiencing fairly high levels of
neuroticism something like that so let's
start with the research because I'm very
interested in the trolls because I think
I think one of the the things the trolls
are doing online by the use of derision
and contempt in the manner that they do
spew It Forward especially on platforms
like Twitter you see it also on YouTube
and other platforms is that they raise
the ambient social temperature to a
great degree it's it's like a
externalized pollution in the real world
it's it's psychological pollution they
say things that no one can should
possibly be allowed to get away with in
the public forum they spew their venom
forward and it makes everything appear
more polarized and caustic than it
really is and so who are these people
the anonymous trolls as far as the
Research indicates well I mean the
narcissism does have a good amount to do
with it so
um back when Facebook was The prominent
platform uh for young adults there was a
number of studies on this showing that
people who are high in narcissistic
personality traits have more friends on
Facebook and they comment there more and
they participate more so what that means
is your average interaction on social
media is more likely to be with a
narcissist
um not and the majority maybe but it UPS
the odds compared to your average
conversation face to face so those are
platforms where narcissists Thrive
um and you're absolutely right that
they're the ones who are willing to say
those things and we know now how too
that the algorithms on social media tend
to amplify
things that are divisive things that are
angry because they get more what they
call engagement that's what people
engage with more and that's how the
companies make more money so those tend
to be pushed to the top of the of
people's social media feeds so you are
getting a relatively small population
who's dominating this conversation and
kind of I don't know how else to put it
but ruining for ruining for the rest of
us well you know I've thought for a long
time that a lot of the conditions that
we diagnose as psychopathology
aren't malfunctions let's say have
evolutionarily adapted structures that
was one definition that cropped up a
fair while ago but more like positive
feedback loops that have gone out of
control
so you see this with uh
with uh agoraphobia right people start
to withdraw instead of approaching when
they're anxious and that makes their
anxiety worse so they're more likely to
withdraw you see it with depression
because depressed people are less likely
to interact socially and then they start
to withdraw and that makes them more
depressed they're less likely to go to
work and so forth you see it with
alcohol because people who develop
alcohol tolerance start to drink to cure
their hangover
and so there's there's a lot of
pathological processes that are feedback
loops that have gone out of control and
if the narcissists are garnering excess
attention online and the algorithms are
amplifying that then we have the makings
of something like a virtual social
epidemic and it does look like that to
me I'm trying to understand what's
driving the polarization and
divisiveness and I do think that I think
a lot of it's virtual in some real sense
because
the the online world in the real world
have become so dissociated and so
distinct that they don't even look like
the same place anymore you see that with
media but you also see it with the
things that are so Troublesome to people
online that don't seem to make
themselves manifest in the real world at
all so we've got this weird divorce
that's a consequence of this layer of
abstraction that's the online world and
it's producing its own Associated
pathologies that that rise in
self-destructive Behavior that's
absolutely that's cataclysmically awful
let me add another bit of pathology to
this tell me what you think of this so
you know of course that there's been a
absolute explosion in childhood gender
dysphoria and uh it made sense to me
that that occurred because we added
confusion to the definition of male and
female let's say and when you confuse
people you confuse the most confused the
most and that often tends to be young
girls around 13 and they're the ones
that are prone to psychogenic epidemics
and they're the ones that are
experiencing much higher rates than
normal of so-called gender dysphoria
now I'm curious about your uh thoughts
on that in relationship to attention
seeking because if we took that group of
the the more neurotic catch-up players
on social media they need a marker of
uniqueness or status in order to attract
attention to themselves and it seems to
me that this emphasis on
multi-dimensional sexual identity
provides an easy Avenue to the kind of
uniqueness that might scale well on
social media does that does any of that
make any sense to you is that a
reasonable hypothesis well it's really
hard because these Trends are so new and
we don't yet have uh you know really
solid statistics it's actually something
that I worked on for for my new book so
I'll be able to talk about that a little
bit more
um next year because like that has to be
the first step is we have to say is this
actually increasing because it certainly
seems that way but we need that that
data to figure that out uh and then the
why question is an even harder one to
answer uh because some of course have
made the argument that well there's more
acceptance now and so that's why you
know there are more people who are who
are coming out as as transgender
um but there is the whole question
um which I think is a good we have to
explore it at least about what is the
role of um the online communities in
this because there are some folks who
have said it's it's a positive thing
that
the thing about online communities is if
you're in a relatively unique group you
can find other people like you and then
that can be beneficial
um but there are some who argue that
that may not be as as beneficial
um and I it's it's just so early I think
we just don't really know it's probably
beneficial if the group that you're
pursuing is pursuing beneficial aims
that are part of your character like if
you have a particular creative
proclivity or a particular interest in a
set of ideas and you can find a group
that will support you in that that's not
much different than what happens to kids
who are smart when they go off to
University if universities are working
properly but if you're anorexic and you
find a community that's devoted to
ensuring that you do think that you're
fat and helping you figure out ways to
restrict your food and normalizing that
then obviously that's not helpful at all
quite the contrary and so and and it it
is a peculiar fact that out
statistically unlikely proclivities can
be normalized very rapidly online as a
consequence of the generation of
community because as you know we tend to
um re regard ourselves in relationship
to the peer group the immediate peer
group that we formulate around us and so
if you're one in ten thousand in your
peculiarity but you have 20 people
around you who are the same it's going
to feel pretty damn normal pretty quick
and if you're truly exceptional that's a
good thing but a lot of what constitutes
truly exceptional exceptional is uh is
manifested on the pathological side and
and well and and we don't know the
consequence of community building on
that front yet I think that's that's
correct that
um in general what the internet allows
people to do is to create those
communities based on some of these uh
unique identities and that can be used
for good
um so a gay kid in a small town who
doesn't know anybody else like them can
find a community
but then on the other hand someone who
wants to be anorexic and encourage other
young girls and young women to be
anorexic they can also find each other
and that has some pretty negative
consequences right well and there's also
the facilitation of online predation as
a consequence of of their responsibility
that anonymity allows too so if you are
an isolated young person and you're
searching around for an identity group
you're just quite nicely likely to run
into somebody who's psychopathically
predacious online as well and that
happens in no small uh percentage of
cases I've known a number of adolescents
who got tangled up with someone pretty
damn nasty online much to their parents
Chagrin
and so and that's especially true on the
sexual exploitation front yes and and
that's primarily because social media is
so unregulated so there's there's no age
verification for example you could be 36
and say that you're 13. you can be nine
and say that you're 16 or 13 to be able
to get an account you're supposed to be
13 to get a social media account but
it's not enforced so there's very young
children who are on it and then adults
and children can communicate with each
other and that has led
unfortunately yeah to a lot of sexual
predation and other really unfortunate
situations yeah well you know we could
think about this from an evolutionary
biology perspective I think for a moment
or two that might be interesting so I
know that uh the rates of psychopathy
appear to vary between about one and
five percent cross-culturally and so I
talked to David Buss about various
theories about that
um that percentage and so the first
observation is it's actually not very
effective to be a power mad psychopath
right so 95 to 97 of people aren't and
the reason for that is it's really not a
very effective strategy you even have to
run away from yourself eventually if
you're a psychopath and they tend to
have itinerant Lifestyles because people
caught on to their narcissistic
machiavellianism sooner or later and
then can identify them now it might be
more useful biologically speaking to be
a predatory psychopath than to be
someone who's so depressed and isolated
that they never go out of the house
so you could think about it as a a
strategy of a reproductive strategy that
doesn't always culminate in failure and
that's especially true because young
women are less likely to be able to
distinguish Psychopathic Predators from
confident and competent males
so okay so you you open up a window for
psychopathy and then the windows opened
up too because most people are
cooperative and productive and generous
at least in the main but what that means
is that a small percentage of people can
capitalize on that by mimicking it and
the Psychopaths mimic that by being
confident and assertive and appearing
competent even though they're predators
and and and parasitic in their
fundamental orientation now
those people that one to five percent
present an unbelievable constant danger
to the Integrity of societies right if
it doesn't take that many people to
destabilize a complex society and
certainly three percent is more than
enough and normally the psychopaths are
kept under some regulatory control
because they get identified and isolated
and and punished but I don't think that
happens online
and so it's I don't know to what degree
the look Psychopaths don't learn from
punishment very well at all and they
don't learn from threat very well at all
but online all of that's been removed
there's nothing but a field of
opportunity for predatory Psychopaths
and so I wonder to what degree
virtualizing communication and opening
up this hypothetically Democratic front
has actually magnified the degree to
which our societies are susceptible to
disruption by Machiavellian Psychopaths
that is absolutely possible because yeah
I mean there's there's the trolls and
all of those folks who um you know get
into those situations
they too often absolutely get away with
that um you know I think some people
might argue that well they might get
lots of negative comments and you know
sometimes they do get punished or or
canceled but it's not usually the way it
goes because yeah they have a lot of
tricks
um they can they can be Charming they
can fake their way through it and they
do often get away with a lot just
partially because things are so
unregulated it's the Wild Wild West well
they can also generate multiple
identities so even if one of their
identities gets published punished well
first of all they're not likely to be
very affected by negative feedback to
begin with especially not of the
psychological sort because the typical
psychopath doesn't give a damn what you
think like they might they might react
with some degree of surprise if you
actually hit them but if you just said
something that might disturb a person
with with normal uh conscience let's say
the Psychopaths is going to brush that
off and so so true yeah yeah so okay so
let's go through a little bit more about
what about about igen you talked about
insecure the new Mental Health crisis
and also irreligious irreligious Losing
My Religion and spirituality so let's
talk about insecurity to begin with and
so we we discussed that a little bit are
there other elements that are making so
so kids can't
everything they do is remembered
everything they do is monitored they're
Tethered to their parents 100 of the
time they're glued to a screen they're
not engaging in face-to-face social
contact the way they were they don't
have their independence are there other
factors as far as you can tell that are
rendering the more insecure well for one
thing they're not sleeping enough
um and the percentage of teens who don't
get enough sleep started to rise and
again right at the time that social
media became common and smartphones
became common right around 2012 and
right before the pandemic reached
all-time highs in two different surveys
so when you don't sleep enough that's a
major risk factor for developing
depression and self-harm and it's not
just the the timing not just that the
timing lines up with uh with technology
it's also that kids are spending so much
time
um that on their online that it crowds
out time for sleeping and looking at a
phone before bed or having it in your
bedroom is uniquely awful for getting a
good night's sleep and for getting
enough sleep you know tons of sleep lab
studies that that's the case and is that
a life issue
part of it yeah so there's like there's
a couple things going on so you know one
is if you have that phone in your
bedroom overnight that you part of your
brain knows it's there
um and pretty much what I was writing
the book pretty much every young person
I talked to said that they had their
phone within Arm's Reach when they were
sleeping uh and they they almost all of
them said well I have to have it in my
room because that's my alarm clock and I
would reply then buy an alarm clock
you can buy it on Amazon on your phone
and then put it away and get a good
night's sleep
um but before bed there's two elements
first psychological stimulation pretty
much everything that we do on phones and
tablets is stimulating you know whether
it's reading news or shopping or email
or texting and then imagine being 12
years old and you're waiting for your
crush to text you back you know not
relaxing thoughts right and then the
light issue that the blue light from the
devices especially when held close to
the face tricks our brains into thinking
that it's still daytime and then we
don't produce enough melatonin the sleep
hormone to fall asleep quickly and get a
good night's sleep so there's so many
different factors in the way that
technology is disrupting sleep and that
may be a major mechanism for why we have
such a high rate of uh depression and
truly a mental health crisis among
adolescents and do you have any idea
what the relative strength of these
contributors are we talked about the
necessity to put forward a false and
perfect face we talked about the
possibility of being bullied online that
things can't be forgotten and now we had
a really a biological element to this
which is sleep disruption as a
consequence of the potential for new
information
excitement before bed in in the form of
exposure to all these pathological
social Tendencies we already described
and exposure to Blue Light is there any
research at all that's parsing out the
relative contributions of these
different factors to the rise in
depression and anxiety
it's a great question and I don't think
we really know I mean what we have is
more individual level correlational data
which is going to have some different
factors in those generational and group
Trends
um but sleep definitely has the largest
correlation
with depression and unhappiness um you
know among those factors but it also of
course depends on the individual because
for some kids yeah they may have that
phone away from them at night but then
if they're getting bullied and feel
terrible about their body all day long
that can also have those severe
consequences so
um it's hard to say well those things
tend to Loop too so many many things can
contribute to sleep disruption and then
once sleep gets disrupted well then all
those other things tend to get worse and
now it's all a downhill spiral so yeah
so that that's that's uh that's rough
too uh unexpected consequences of
technological innovation especially on
the light front yeah that's a rough one
you talked about irreligious and Losing
My Religion and spirituality and so
um that's an interesting that's an
interesting measurement let's say or an
interesting issue to focus on and so
tell me about the significance of that
yeah so you know we've known for a while
that the number of people who affiliate
with a religion or attend religious
Services has gone down especially among
teens and young adults but for there
were kind of these series for a while
like okay well young people are not as
interested in institutions and joining a
group so that's why that's gone down but
privately they still pray and believe in
God well as of about 15 years ago that
also started to go down so that theory
had to be discarded because even private
religious beliefs started to decline
then you got the theory of oh well
they're not really just but they're more
spiritual the data doesn't back that one
up either from the surveys that number
of people say that they're a spiritual
person has stayed fairly constant even
well than there were people saying their
religious has gone way down and then
among University students fewer say that
they feel like they're above average in
spirituality so not religious not
particularly spiritual either and you
get a decline in the a number of young
people who say that finding a meeting
and purpose in life is important that
developing a meaningful philosophy of
life is important so all of these
intrinsic things
these intrinsic values and goals have
become less important those all seem to
be medium to long-term goals right so to
develop a purpose in life to develop a
philosophy of life to aim at an
integrated spirituality and one of the
things that the web does particularly
well is capitalize on short-term
attentional uh uh well let's just call
it short-term attention right it's the
next heart thing it's like it's like
it's the it's the 24-hour news cycle in
some sense broken down into 30 second
bits
and so and you can distract yourself
endlessly with those sorts of things I
mean I'm saying this too obviously as a
prolific creator of more long-form
content but we use tick tock and
Instagram in these shorter forms as well
to communicate with but you can you can
certainly feed yourself on a steady diet
of
15 to 30 second clips and they are
engaging in the moment it's like a
Non-Stop procession of personalized ads
in some real sense and it often is ads
and so that seems to be happening at the
expense of these medium to long-term
commitments that might be indicative of
maturity and adulthood and spirituality
religious orientation civic duty all of
that
maybe that's contributing to that
immaturity as well a the maintenance of
that short-term attention because that's
that's the experience so many people
have online especially in platforms like
Tick Tock uh you know you're just
watching all of these short videos and
then before you know it an hour has gone
by an hour of your life you're not going
to get back and it is just that what's
immediate and you have to respond to
your friend's post right away and make a
comment or say that you like it and it's
all of that immediacy that isn't really
focused on on on the long term in a way
which you know is is funny because in
other ways this generation igen or
Generation Z has been taught to focus on
the long term so they're not doing that
on their phones but then in terms of
goals around careers and going to
college and university and all of those
things they do focus on that and they've
it's been ingrained in them that they
have to be long-term planners and make
sure that they're thinking about each
step of of their lives
um so they have that disconnect between
what adults are telling them to do for
the plans for their life and then what
the way that they're living online
right right
so and then insulated but not intrinsic
more safety and less Community what does
that mean
so the safety piece was interesting
because when I first started the book
um it wasn't something that was really
on my radar screen but the more I talked
to you
um young people in this generation and
the more
um I looked at what had really changed
in society
safety was a major Ranger theme that
kept coming up over and over and again
there's trade-offs the upside is that
there's been so much emphasis on the
safety of children and teens that
that's worked a lot for your teens
getting car accidents or any kind of of
uh injuries
um same thing with with children all of
these safety things that we put in place
have really done a good job
um but it's not just protecting kids
from physical dangers that society's
focused on in many ways it has shifted
to also protecting kids from having
experiences from being upset from
failure from all of these learning
experiences from Adventure
yeah from absolutely from taking risks
and what's really interesting is jensy
has not rebelled against that which is
what you might expect you know
adolescence to do they have embraced it
so they are less likely to say they want
to take risks say when they're when
they're 60 and 15 years old what
happened to
deliciousness like that
that's such a pronounced characteristic
of being a teenager you also touched on
that when you mentioned that so many
fewer kids are getting their driver's
license and that was just
incomprehensible to me when I first
became aware of it because I remember
when I was 14 15 every single person I
knew was just absolutely they were lined
up outside the driver's license office
like an hour before their birthday to
get their license that was that was top
of the priority and part of that was to
be able to get away and to be autonomous
and so I can't how why do you think that
that Spirit of adolescent rebelliousness
has vanished to such a great degree yeah
it's there's a lot of different factors
but you know a lot of it is just that
has been the way that Society has
shifted in so many ways is placing
safety as the top priority not just
physically but also in gen Z in
particular I still talk about this
emotional safety so and many of them
told me that they thought emotional
safety was just as important as physical
safety that that was one of the reasons
they were scared of social interactions
because you never know what someone
might say to you into a gen xer like me
and I was like well yeah that's how it
works but they're used to texting and
being able to compose their response and
to not have to worry about the look on
their face when they read what someone
else you know has said so that's one
factor that that comes in there and then
it is also just with the slow life
strategy and other changes
um in parenting and in culture in
general in how we treat young people
that
yes it's good that we have tried to
protect them from a lot of these dangers
but we have also coddled them in some
ways that has done them a real
disservice that we have not prepared
them for adulthood that we have not let
them take as many risks and learn from
that and have adventure and all those
things well that risk of direct
communication is an interesting one I
heard a comedian in in in UK at a free
speech comedy event who said that she
had gone to uh a university to do a
comedy show and they gave her a list of
topics that were off
limits which is a hell of a thing to do
to a comedian and then not only that
they gave all the student attendees
these Badges and if the badge were green
if the badge was green that you were
wearing then other people could talk to
you without your permission including
the comedian but if you didn't have a
green badge yeah no kidding but and I
didn't have any I thought that was
pathological beyond comprehension but
it's so protective that it's it's
positively eatable but you know you you
just put your finger on something
interesting which is if if you're
accustomed to being able to formulate
your response thoughtfully you're doing
that by text for example then the
immediacy of interpersonal contact might
be off-putting to you like I mean I
don't know how isolated the kids are who
only use their phones I'm sure do we
know for example if this is more true of
introverted kids like are they
introverted neurotics even more likely
to use their phone and text instead of
engaging in any face-to-face interaction
well maybe but then on the other hand
extroverts send more texts because they
have more social interactions and social
relationships and General so there's
some kind of cross currents there that
might be hard to tease out but the
neuroticism piece that would make sense
more likely maybe to text than say you
have a phone conversation where that
might be more anxiety provoking chapter
eight is uh income insecurity working to
earn but not to show up and you talk a
bit about shopping in in the in the IGN
book about the fact that that also feeds
into this self-centeredness in some
sense that money is for it's it's
consumerism going mad and of course
that's promoted
um by the social media networks that are
monetizing teenage attention
and you said that teenagers are also
much less likely to have
to be engaged in gainful employment
which was obviously a step towards
maturation for many people in previous
generations or maybe the actual Catalyst
for maturation
apart from relationships yeah and
they're less likely to get an allowance
as well so when you don't have a job and
you don't have an allowance and you're
not learning how to manage your own
money so it's more that your parents
will give you money and so that's
another aspect where they're not
learning as much about how to make
decisions is around money yeah well it's
very this brings up the issue in some
sense of optimal deprivation eh you have
older parents you have fewer siblings
your parents in some sense care more for
you you might even in some way have a
closer relationship with them but then
the question is is it too close but
how do you deprive your children
properly under such circumstances so
that they're motivated to go do things
on their own and again when that becomes
a choice it's very difficult to say no
all the time when you could be saying
yes
it's the Dilemma of modern parenting and
I think where that comes up often the
most is around technology so it's not
just in mom you know I want to buy this
thing or the other thing
um I think a lot I have I have three
kids myself two of whom are teenagers
and what I know from my fellow parents
as well as my own experience is that
there's always I want that I want the
smartphone and I want the I want this
social media app and why can't I do it
because everybody else is doing it yeah
yeah and that that's the dilemma and
modern parenting is supposed to be well
I want to make my kids happy
and usually you think it's going to be
easier to make them happy by saying yes
but then if you say yes to some of these
sayings what's going to happen is all
the all the potential consequences that
we've been talking about but it's
difficult because of course not
everybody is going to have the very
negative outcome some people are going
to be on social media and be fine but
you don't know which your kid is which
bucket your kid's going to end up in
until they use it
so then if you're the cautious parent
who says I'm not going to get my kid a
phone until she's 16 or 18.
gonna be the only one in a high school
of 1500 people who doesn't have one and
same thing with social media so it's a
very difficult dilemma right now as the
parent the parent of of teenagers
chapter nine is inclusive LGBT gender
and race issues in the new age when I
when I first read
sections of this chapter I thought well
this strikes me as as
predictable in some sense given the
virtualization of everything you know
one of the things that being online
allows you to do
is to experiment with different
identities that are disposable but and
that are virtual and then I also thought
that to the degree that
childhood is being extended and maybe
interfered with especially at the early
stages when pretend plays should be
occurring and there's so much screen
time that experimentation with identity
which is a form of play might be being
extended out into adolescence and
further on so you get virtualization and
the extension of fantasy play it's not
surprising to me that igen young people
would be
what would you describe it as uh very
open in relationship to their proclaimed
identity especially also if they're
earning attention points for announcing
a non-standard identity and also having
no other identity to replace it with in
some real sense well I think there's a
lot of other factors at work here too
because of course um you know these
these these Trends have been going on
for longer so as opposed to say some of
the mental health Trends which really
didn't start to appear until 2012.
um the rise and say
um support for same-sex marriage and the
Embrace of uh LGBT identities that's
been building for a longer time so we
see that also you know even for Gen xers
and and Millennials that that's been you
know rolling out for for quite a long
time so I think it's also a function of
individualism
and that was a major theme in generation
me my book on the Millennials and it
still is a different flavor for igen or
gen Z but it's it's absolutely still
present that we have the growth in um
you know North American culture that's
always been individualistic but has
become much more so especially since the
late 1960s so more focus on the self
less focus on social rules and what you
get with individualism is the acceptance
of difference and that people will be
who they are and so that I think is that
it's also a natural consequence of more
individualism that you will get more
acceptance
um of different sexual orientations all
right well it's a strange individualism
though because it's it's based again on
what you might describe is maximization
of short-term identity
so the claim is I can be whoever I want
and all all social regulation of that is
nothing but an imposition which is
really not true at all because most of
the time following social principles
allows you to form relationships with
other people and opens up Horizons of
opportunity to you that's that's the
benefit of sacrificing not exactly
individuality but short-term individual
whim and it's something that children
learn as they mature right they can't
get everything they want right now but
the payoff for that is that they can get
along with other people and that things
work better over the long run and that
all
that that I would say understanding that
and then abiding by that principle of
medium to long-term well-being is
something like maturation and this
individualism that you're describing
isn't really I don't think it's really
it's not an enlightened individualism
because it's too short term it's more
like well I am whatever I feel I am
right at this moment and to me that
smacks of well nothing more than in some
real sense like a two-year-old
immaturity and I mean that technically
because two-year-olds are very whim
oriented very very short term
and and very self-centered they can't
play with other people
and so the you have the dissolution of
identity right there's no community no
real community
not in terms of community organization
but also not in terms of real
face-to-face friendships and
interactions there's no participation in
religious
um Enterprises there's no real reading
about political or philosophical matters
there's a decline in spirituality so
there's a real collapse of sophisticated
identity and all of this well the
sexualization of identity seems to me to
be a in some sense uh what would you say
a replacement for that or reaction to
that does does that does that seem on
point to you or am I missing something
there well you know I I think you're
correct in that some of those elements
of individualism are much more
short-term and not as deeply seated you
know in terms of you know religion and
meaning and you know more focus on on
some of the short term but I I think you
know lesbian and gay and bisexual
identity is is is not really an example
of that because that seems to be more
deeply seated and constant for for most
people that does seem to be a much more
long-term identity so that
um I think is not as much on the part of
individualism having to do with that um
the self-focus it's more around
accepting difference and accepting
people for who they are and taking some
of the more traditional social rules and
saying you know this these don't really
recognize people as individuals and for
who they are and that's that might be
different it might not be in the
majority but that that's who they are as
people oh you you talked in your book um
in in uh
in generation me you talked about the
self-esteem movement and self-esteem has
always been a particular bug bearer of
mine I would say especially since I
discovered that psychometrically it was
basically composed of low neuroticism
with a bit of extroversion thrown in and
so self-esteem is a proxy for
neuroticism in many many ways and isn't
obvious to me at all that you treat
neuroticism by treating people to be
more self-centered
you know one of the things I used to do
with my clients who were socially
anxious say when they'd go into a social
situation they'd start obsessing about
how they were appearing to other people
they'd fall into that trap and then
they'd stop making eye contact and then
they would get awkward and then they
would engage in non-sequiturs and the
whole conversation would grind to a halt
and I asked them instead to concentrate
as hard as they could on putting the
other person at ease
and that gave them something to think
about other than themselves and so the
self-esteem movement was predicated on
the idea that people higher neuroticism
had low self-esteem which I don't think
was true at all and that the right
remediation for that was to treat
everyone as if they were uniquely so it
was like narcissism was the antidote to
neuroticism and that's right it's so
appalling it doesn't work no yeah no no
in fact it makes it much worse and so
exactly yeah okay okay okay so well I'm
I I'm relieved to hear that your
sentiments are in keeping with that
formulation I mean I've been trying to
base it on the relevant data trying to
figure that out chapter 10 independent
politics
so what about well you said that the
igen people they're not watching the
news the news is dead right I mean
Legacy Media news is dead I don't think
anybody watches it I think all people
have the TV on and that's where the
ratings come from so that's just gone
that centralizing ability that the
Nightly News had to broadcast a similar
message in some sense to everyone in
bolster identity that's disappeared too
everybody's in their own news I wouldn't
say bubble exactly but it's fragmented
so much that there's no Unity of
apprehension what's happening on the
political front with the IGN types yeah
so there's a couple of things going on
so one is that a lot more young people
now uh say they don't want to belong to
a political party at all that they're
politically independent uh and that's
been going on for a while
the other big piece is just huge
political polarization you know
partially for the reasons that you
mentioned that everything is so atomized
that you can get your news from a
particular Source
um and perhaps because of the caustic
nature of a lot of online interaction
it becomes contentious very very quickly
so we have a political atmosphere
um that's just very very aggressive and
very very polarized and I mean it's
gotten to the point here in the U.S
where people don't even agree on their
own facts
that people that the two parties have
different sets of facts
um and young people reflect that larger
cultural change uh I think they may want
to change it but they also
um show more who say they're very
liberal or very conservative or uh very
much on the left or very much on the
right and fewer in the middle yeah well
that that atomization of political
identity it's another uh interesting
Twist on the notion of individualism
because you might say that not abiding
not joining a political party not
joining a political group not joining a
religion not cementing a local social
network let's say frees you up because
you're not constrained by the necessity
of abiding by the principles of those
groups but the problem with that is is
that the more and this is something that
people don't really understand well
about choice is
there's not a lot of difference between
excess choice and anxiety
they're very much the same thing right
if you have too many Pathways open in
front of you and I can't help but think
that this is contributing to the
epidemic of depression and anxiety I
mean if you have a three-year-old who
wants to dress himself and you open up a
closet full of clothes he's he or she is
just generally stumped into immobility
if you lay out three outfits on the bed
and say pick one then they're perfectly
happy because they've had the right
about constrained choice and we've been
teaching young people that all all
social norms are nothing but constraints
on this individualistic freedom and that
completely underplays the role that
identity plays in encapsulating anxiety
now I was talking to Carl friston the
other day the neuroscientist and he's
convinced as are many people that our
conceptions are entropy management uh uh
techniques in in some real sense so you
know once you define yourself for
example within the confines of a given
identity
now you're playing a bounded game that
might open up an interesting amount of
options but not so much that you drown
and to lose all those intermediary
social structures except maybe the bond
you have with your parents that that
strikes me as a well as a mental health
catastrophe so we should conclude this
Maybe by talking about your last chapter
um
what's to be done
yeah well you know I think we absolutely
have to get a better handle on
technology particularly social media we
need more regulation we need more
balance
um technology is not all bad by any
means I mean it's amazing how many
things that we can do
um with what we have but it has to be a
tool we use not a tool that uses us and
the latter is exactly where we are that
it's amazing how many people talk about
social media using the language of
addiction
and it is very clear
um what impact these technologies have
had on young people in particular
um and they're in the Mental Health
crisis that we're confronting so we
really have to get a handle on this and
one thing that I am encouraged by is how
many young people are recognizing this
and taking those steps themselves
um a college student named Emma Lemke
who founded a movement called log off
and she says it was from her having such
a incredibly terrible experience with
Instagram when she was a high school
student and so she's encouraging other
young people to cut back if not
eliminate their social media use and
experience the rest of life and leave a
lot of that toxicity behind and I'm
encouraged to see more of that and more
bipartisan support for regulating social
media and so maybe we'll get there well
and so what do you have for suggestions
that are practical on the regular Nation
front we talked a little bit about well
clamping down on the online trolls and
the anonymous accounts I mean that just
seems to me to be a no-brainer at least
they could be put in their own category
right you're either a real person or
you're a fictional Anonymous or a bot in
which case you know you're consigned to
Perdition people can read your comments
if they want but
but concretely what do you first of all
what do you think the social media
platforms could do and should do and and
even if they did it do you think that
the social media landscape will just
transform itself so rapidly that it'll
elude any sort of Regulation because I
mean a lot of these social media
platforms are only a couple of years old
they spring into being they're massively
powerful I don't imagine they have a
tremendous amount of longevity and so
we're playing regulatory catch up all
the time yeah absolutely well you know I
think a lot of it starts with age
verification if we can verify people's
age we would cut down on a lot of the
sexual predation we would get rid of
children 12 and under being on the
platforms
um the platforms could have
um more regulation and uh be safer for
say 13 to 17 year olds in terms of you
know hiding the likes and comments on
other people's posts
if Facebook actually tried that at one
point they called it project Daisy and
they decided not to implement it because
it cut down on Revenue even though they
showed it it cut down on social
comparison particularly for teens so
there's there's a really there's a long
list of lot of of regulations that could
be put in place that you know would have
only a small impact on the social media
companies that that decrease in Revenue
with project Daisy was one percent
oh well it's good of them not to have
implemented it then because you know one
percent is pretty catastrophic
so there's so many things that they
could do to keep kids and teens safer uh
but it it depends on not on I think not
being anonymous not being able to open
multiple accounts and verifying age
right right and who do you know that's
where apart from you who do you know
that's working on such ideas I know that
Jonathan height has made many
suggestions on the on the internet
pathology front it doesn't appear to me
that the big social media companies are
really paying attention to the
psychological research in any real sense
I mean maybe that's unfair but I don't
think so the comment sections could have
been cleaned up Long Ago by anybody with
any sense as far as I can tell I think
they know I think they know it they know
they know the research it's just they
have their own reasons for not acting on
it some of which are Financial right
right and so who else apart from you and
Jonathan height are worth talking to
about the internet predicament that
young people have found themselves in
there's a lot of great research on this
topic
um there's a Australian researchers done
a lot of stuff on Instagram and Body
Image um I I may get her her first name
Ryan Marika Tigerman
um she's done a lot of great stuff on
that uh Brian primac who's uh an MD by
training and works in public health has
done a lot of great stuff too on um
looking at social media use and how it
relates to depression and loneliness and
he's looked at young adults in
particular well maybe I can get in
contact with you to to get some of these
names because I'd like to put together a
little group of people who are
concentrating on social media regulation
and maybe introduce them to the
political types that I have access to
because it's a pressing issue and it's
not being dealt with well and it's
driving polarization in a terrible way
and uh so all right well we should wrap
up this part of our conversation we
spoke today almost primarily about your
new book igen an analysis of the first
generation the behavior of the first
generation who's been who've been
exposed I would say over the entire
course of their life to these radically
new technologies that we so thoughtfully
refer to as phones
when they're much more God only knows
what they are but they're certainly not
phones and I appreciate you very much
sharing your Insight with us today and
I'd like to thank everybody who's
watching and listening on YouTube and to
remind you that I do an extra half an
hour with my guests on The Daily wire
plus platform where I walk through their
lives in a more biographical sense
trying to assess well the ups and downs
of their career but also to try to focus
in on what's made them particularly
let's say successful and impactful and
and uh what prices they paid for that
what benefits have accrued so for those
of you who are interested head over to
the Daily wire plus platform and you can
hear Dr twingy for another half an hour
talking with me
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com